ever since Apple came out with that
first M1 laptop the entire Windows
laptop space has been trying to play
catchup on Energy Efficiency like at
this point Windows devices have better
screens they have better performance
they have better pricing they have
better gaming capabilities they have
upgradable components there's so much
stuff that's better when it comes to
Windows devices but when it comes to
Energy Efficiency Apple has the very
clear lead and this is the metric that
Apple leans in on right even when they
first launched the chip that was their
whole thing performance per watt year on
year it's like the thing that they lean
on for their marketing material because
it's really good now the reason why it's
so important is because Energy
Efficiency defines so much stuff when it
comes to a laptop it defines like the
form factor your battery life your heat
output your how loud your fans are maybe
you can even have a fanless system if
it's energy efficient enough and one of
the main reasons why MacBooks have such
good Energy Efficiency is because they
use the arm architecture in their chips
instead of the x86 architecture that the
vast majority of Windows laptops use now
very soon like in a matter of weeks we
are going to be seeing a whole slew of
laptops that contain a new chip from
Qualcomm the arm-based Snapdragon X
Elite and these laptops are supposed to
be able to properly compete against
Apple's MacBooks across the board now
you might be thinking Dave arm-based
Windows laptops aren't anything new how
do we know that this one won't suck like
all the other ones of the past I
wondered the same thing so uh in 2019 I
did my first review of a arm-based
Windows laptop the Surface Pro X and my
review of that device was it was
lukewarm at best you know what I can't
even call lukewarm I said that thing
sucked because they just had bad
software support and even for apps that
did run on it it just didn't have great
performance the chip wasn't special
enough for people to be for people to
buy it and because people weren't
purchasing this thing I don't even think
manufacturers were that interested in
doing follow-ups of that device but this
time it's really different because if
you look at this new chip the Snapdragon
Elite chip almost every major laptop
company is going to be on board for this
launch because the performance of this
chip has caught their eye it seems to be
really good in geekbench and cin bench
now granted these are synthetic
benchmarks running native versions of
those benchmarks so it's like best case
scenario but very impressive numbers
Apple does have their M3 Max but that's
just a completely different class of
Chip and also if you look at some of the
GPU benchmarks it's quite impressive
there is one thing to note here if you
look at those benchmarks there's two
variants that they showed a 23 watt
version and then an 80 watt version an
80 watt TDP is fairly high for a laptop
23 to 30 is probably kind of like your
average thin and light 14inch device I
am a little bit disappointed that they
didn't showcase some kind of like 10 to
15 watt performance metric because if
they had shown that that to me would
have been like there's going to be a
fanless version right CU I think on a
fanless device you kind of need to keep
it below 15 watts TDP I think in general
we're going to be seeing devices that
are much quieter compared to an Intel or
an AMD system right now but still having
awesome performance now the second thing
I want to talk about is software so all
the benchmarks that you saw right there
were done on apps that were built
specifically for arm chips now right now
in 2024 there's a decent amount of like
first-party Microsoft apps that run
natively on arm chips but the vast
majority of thirdparty apps still do not
have versions that are natively compiled
for arm chips it's been like 4 years
since I did my review on the original
Surface Pro X and since that time I
would have imagined there'd be way more
developers that have gone on board with
this whole native arm stuff it's still
fairly limited now it does make sense
like from the perspective of developers
unless there's an actual demand for this
kind of stuff you're not going to put
the resources in time that's required to
maintain another version of your app but
I do think that with this new hardware
Snapdragon Elite it pushes customers
towards it because it's attractive and
consequently developers come with but
for the apps that are still
x86 you still need to run emulation to
be able to run it on these arm chips now
back in 2019
because those chips weren't super
powerful emulation was bad also the
emulator only supported 32-bit apps at
launch so that was also awful but now
it's actually pretty decent it supports
64-bit apps and emulated performance is
pretty close to Native but there is a
noticeable reduction in Energy
Efficiency when you run emulated apps
and that's just the nature of real-time
emulation Apple does handle their
emulation differently like technically
it's not even emulation it's a
translation layer so it actually creates
this unoptimized but native arm code the
first time we launch it so it's not as
big of a performance hit the point I'm
trying to make though is that Apple's
Rosetta 2 is like it's going to be
better than what Windows has in terms of
the emulation SL transation however
because of these chips being as powerful
as they are I think they can just brute
force it I think that you throw in an
x86 app on these new Snapdragon chips I
think it just has the power to just push
it out and be like it just works not as
energy efficient but it'll work now
qualcomm's also talked about gaming
performance on these new Chips I have my
reservations like the idea of emulated
games on these systems the chip is good
it's similar to like an RTX 3050 let's
say in terms of just raw performance
capabilities now qualcomm's telling
developers that existing Games should
just work but there's so much stuff that
goes wrong when you emulate games on
across architectures like I I can't
imagine it coming out smoothly at least
that's what it's been like in the past
so if there's any difference this time
I'd be pleasantly surprised um okay last
thing I want to talk about pricing and
configuration so uh we've seen well
these are these are arm chips and when
it comes to arm chips you don't tend to
not have removable Ram it's not like you
just like swap out Ram modules kind of
like MacBooks but also I think that
there won't be removable drives like I
think that the drives will be baked onto
these systems the same way that MacBooks
are so you're going to be stuck with
deciding and choosing your RAM
configuration and storage configuration
for the life of the product now because
this is Windows I really don't think
they're going to have like 8 gigabyte
RAM options and 256 storage options like
that to me I don't think Windows would
allow that I really don't so I think
they'll be like 16 and 512 at a minimum
but it's all baked on now the other
thing is pricing in order for this
product to matter I really think pricing
is like absolutely critical because if
everything lines up if they do have an
awesome chip with awesome battery life
with great emulation support like if
it's super expensive
none of this video matters this entire
product is dead to me if the pricing is
horrible because it's so competitive at
this point yes nothing can match the
power efficiency of apple and yes these
devices are theoretically the ones to be
able to do it but if the pricing sucks
there's just a million other really good
options that people are going to pick
instead of a super expensive arm-based
Windows laptop I just hope that Qualcomm
recognizes kind of the scenario they
have at hand here it's awesome
opportunity to make some real Headway in
like Market space and just awareness of
this type of product but please don't be
super expensive that would suck um okay
there you have it I really think these
Windows laptops will be I think they'll
be cool I think they'll be the first
time I've been interested in a Windows
like an arm-based Windows laptop in four
years it's been a
while